docs/CONTEST_NAVIGATION_FOR_DEVS.md, before:

# Contest Navigation Reference (Developers)

> **Scope.** This document describes the **default modern flight pipeline**. Legacy compatibility switches (`--legacy-mode`, `--legacy-physics`, etc.) intentionally diverge and are not detailed here.

## 1. Simulation Cadence
- **Turn length:** `g_game_turn_duration = 1.0` second.
- **Physics slices:** `g_physics_simulation_dt` (default 0.2 s). The server executes `ceil(turn_duration / dt)` slices per turn (five with defaults).
- **Order ingestion:** Each team submits orders once per turn. Orders are latched until the next turn; there is no mid-turn reissue.

### 1.1 Per-slice Execution Order
1. **Handle jettison:** Convert queued jettison orders into asteroid spawn requests. Remove the mass from the ship.
2. **Charge shields:** `O_SHIELD` consumes fuel immediately; shield amount clamps to max capacity.
3. **Integrate turn/thrust:** `ProcessThrustOrderNew` / `ProcessThrustDriftNew` and the triangular rotation model apply the portion of the order scheduled for this slice.
4. **Drift:** Positions advance via `Pos += Vel * dt`; orientation integrates angular velocity.
5. **Collisions:** `CollisionEvaluationNew()` runs using snapshots captured at the start of the slice.
6. **Apply additions/removals:** Spawn queued objects, remove corpses.
- **Post-slices:** After the last slice, `LaserModelNew()` handles laser orders for the turn.

## 2. Order Semantics
- **Thrust (`O_THRUST`):** Requested Δv ∈ [-60, 60] u/s. Split evenly across slices. Fuel cost uses `CalcThrustCost`, scaling with total mass. While docked, fuel cost is forced to 0; the entire launch turn is free.
- **Turn (`O_TURN`):** Requested angle may be any value (e.g., +3π/2 or -5π). The engine normalizes it to the shortest path ∈ [-π, π] to achieve the target heading (e.g., +3π/2 → -π/2). The ship is modeled as a **uniform disk** for rotational physics. The triangular angular velocity profile linearly accelerates from rest to peak angular velocity at the midpoint, then linearly decelerates back to rest. Ships never spin continuously - orientation changes only via turn orders and angular velocity always returns to zero at turn end. **Fuel cost** is calculated from the rotational kinetic energy changes during the acceleration/deceleration phases (not the total turn KE delta, which is zero since the ship starts and ends at rest). Total fuel = 2 × (peak rotational KE) / `g_ship_turn_energy_per_fuel_ton`.
- **Laser (`O_LASER`):** Request beam length. Maximum beam length is clamped to `min(map_width / 2, map_height / 2)` (default: 512 units for a 1024×1024 map). Fuel cost `length / g_laser_range_per_fuel_unit`. Cannot fire while docked.
- **Shield (`O_SHIELD`):** Consumes fuel 1:1 with requested shield gain (clamped to capacity). Applies before thrust.
- **Jettison:** Use the `SetJettison(MaterialKind, amount)` helper function, which takes a cargo type (`URANIUM` or `VINYL`) and a positive amount in tons. Internally, this converts to an `O_JETTISON` order with positive magnitude for uranium and negative magnitude for vinyl, but this is an implementation detail - **all jettison orders should be issued through `SetJettison()`**, not by calling `SetOrder(O_JETTISON, ...)` directly. Orders issued while docked are ignored by the engine.
- **Order clearing:** After execution each turn, `SetOrder(..., 0)` resets orders. Laser/shield/thrust/turn orders do not persist.

## 3. Velocity Governor
- Velocity is clamped to `g_game_max_speed = 30` units/second. After each thrust impulse, the engine calculates the desired velocity and clamps it to the speed circle if necessary.
- **Governor fuel penalty:** `CalcThrustCost` **is aware of velocity clamping** and applies an additional fuel penalty equal to the overshoot amount. The ship pays:
  1. **Base thrust cost** for the requested thrust magnitude
  2. **Governor penalty cost** for the overshoot amount (how much the velocity exceeds 30 u/s before clamping)
  3. **Total fuel cost** = base cost + governor penalty (effectively paying for more thrust than was actually applied)
- **Example:** Ship moving at 15 u/s issues thrust of 45 u/s in the same direction:
  - Desired velocity = 15 + 45 = 60 u/s
  - Clamped to 30 u/s (overshoot = 30 u/s)
  - Fuel cost = equivalent to **75 u/s of thrust** (45 requested + 30 penalty)
- Thrust is applied along the ship's current orientation; reverse thrust uses the opposite vector.
- Orientation is independent of velocity; the ship may drift sideways relative to its nose until thrust or collisions alter the trajectory.

## 4. Docking / Undocking Mechanics
- **Docking:** When a ship docks (collides with any station):
  - Sets `bDockFlag = true` and `Vel = 0`
  - **Immediately transfers all vinyl cargo** to the station's vinyl reserves (deducted from ship's cargo, added to station's score)
  - Ship is filtered from collision pairing except with their own station
- **Launch:** When issuing a thrust order while docked:
  - `ProcessThrustDriftNew` teleports the ship along orientation by `station_radius + ship_radius + ship_radius / 2` (48 units for default sizes)
  - Launch occurs before the first thrust impulse of the turn
  - **Thrust orders cost 0 fuel** for the entire launch turn (shield and laser orders still consume fuel normally)
- `pending_docks` set in `CollisionEvaluationNew` prevents newly docked ships from colliding again later in the same slice.

## 5. World Geometry
- Map extents: `[-fWXMax, fWXMax)` × `[-fWYMax, fWYMax)` (default ±512). `CCoord::Wrap()` and `PredictPosition()` implement toroidal projection.
- Angles: 0 radians = +X, π/2 = +Y. All physics use the standard mathematical orientation.
- Observer UI: renders +Y downward for display purposes. Internal math remains unchanged.

## 6. Fuel Accounting
- `SetOrder` returns the estimated fuel cost actually scheduled (after clamping to available fuel). Callers should rely on the returned value for planning.
- During execution, fuel is re-validated. If remaining fuel is insufficient for a slice, the engine scales the impulse proportionally.
- Shield charges happen before thrust; shield fuel draw can therefore reduce thrust capability within the same turn.
- Thrust orders on launch turns bypass fuel validation entirely (special-case in `ProcessThrustDriftNew`). Shield and laser orders still consume fuel normally.

## 7. Implementation Notes
- Orders live in `CShip::adOrders`. Values persist until consumed during `Drift`.
- Thrust/turn decisions rely on `g_pParser->UseNewFeature("velocity-limits")` to select new vs legacy logic; defaults enable the modern code paths.
- Random launch logging and collision ties draw from the world RNG seeded once at startup (`0x4D4D3434` by default). No team-owned RNGs influence physics, keeping runs reproducible.
- When extending navigation, ensure new orders respect the sub-step schedule and interact correctly with the velocity governor.
- Perfectly elastic collision normals (ship ↔ ship, ship ↔ non-fit asteroids) now use the geometric line-of-centers. When both centres coincide the engine falls back to the shared random heading stored in the collision context.

### 7.1 Initial Ship Orientation Fix

**Location:** `team/src/Ship.C`, lines 102-121 (CShip constructor)

**Feature Flag:** `initial-orientation` (enabled by default, disabled in `--legacy-mode`)

**Problem:** Legacy engine initialized all ships with `orient = 0.0` (facing east), creating an asymmetry:
- Station at (-256, -256): Ships face east (0°), which is ~45° **away** from map center (southeast)
- Station at (256, 256): Ships face east (0°), which is ~45° **toward** map center (southwest)

This gave one team an unfair advantage in initial positioning for resource collection toward the center.

**Solution:** Ships now face toward the map center for balanced gameplay:
```cpp
// In CShip::CShip() constructor (Ship.C:111-121):
extern CParser* g_pParser;
if (g_pParser && !g_pParser->UseNewFeature("initial-orientation")) {
    // Legacy mode: all ships face east (asymmetric)
    orient = 0.0;
} else {
    // New mode: ships face toward map center (balanced)
    // Negative X stations: face east (0)
    // Positive X stations: face west (π)
    orient = (StPos.fX < 0.0) ? 0.0 : PI;
}
```

**Result:**
- Team at (-256, -256): `orient = 0.0` (east, toward center)
- Team at (256, 256): `orient = π` (west, toward center)

Both teams now have symmetric starting conditions. The orientation is set once during ship construction and affects only initial spawn state - teams can rotate freely after that.

**Testing:** Run with `--legacy-initial-orientation` to restore the old asymmetric behavior for comparison.

For contest-level descriptions, see `CONTEST_NAVIGATION_FOR_CONTESTANTS.md`. For collision specifics, refer to the physics guides.

Commit message:

Fixed center vs. edge traverasal asymmetry when undocking and headed to the opposing station.

docs/CONTEST_NAVIGATION_FOR_DEVS.md, after:

# Contest Navigation Reference (Developers)

> **Scope.** This document describes the **default modern flight pipeline**. Legacy compatibility switches (`--legacy-mode`, `--legacy-physics`, etc.) intentionally diverge and are not detailed here.

## 1. Simulation Cadence
- **Turn length:** `g_game_turn_duration = 1.0` second.
- **Physics slices:** `g_physics_simulation_dt` (default 0.2 s). The server executes `ceil(turn_duration / dt)` slices per turn (five with defaults).
- **Order ingestion:** Each team submits orders once per turn. Orders are latched until the next turn; there is no mid-turn reissue.

### 1.1 Per-slice Execution Order
1. **Handle jettison:** Convert queued jettison orders into asteroid spawn requests. Remove the mass from the ship.
2. **Charge shields:** `O_SHIELD` consumes fuel immediately; shield amount clamps to max capacity.
3. **Integrate turn/thrust:** `ProcessThrustOrderNew` / `ProcessThrustDriftNew` and the triangular rotation model apply the portion of the order scheduled for this slice.
4. **Drift:** Positions advance via `Pos += Vel * dt`; orientation integrates angular velocity.
5. **Collisions:** `CollisionEvaluationNew()` runs using snapshots captured at the start of the slice.
6. **Apply additions/removals:** Spawn queued objects, remove corpses.
- **Post-slices:** After the last slice, `LaserModelNew()` handles laser orders for the turn.

## 2. Order Semantics
- **Thrust (`O_THRUST`):** Requested Δv ∈ [-60, 60] u/s. Split evenly across slices. Fuel cost uses `CalcThrustCost`, scaling with total mass. While docked, fuel cost is forced to 0; the entire launch turn is free.
- **Turn (`O_TURN`):** Requested angle may be any value (e.g., +3π/2 or -5π). The engine normalizes it to the shortest path ∈ [-π, π] to achieve the target heading (e.g., +3π/2 → -π/2). The ship is modeled as a **uniform disk** for rotational physics. The triangular angular velocity profile linearly accelerates from rest to peak angular velocity at the midpoint, then linearly decelerates back to rest. Ships never spin continuously - orientation changes only via turn orders and angular velocity always returns to zero at turn end. **Fuel cost** is calculated from the rotational kinetic energy changes during the acceleration/deceleration phases (not the total turn KE delta, which is zero since the ship starts and ends at rest). Total fuel = 2 × (peak rotational KE) / `g_ship_turn_energy_per_fuel_ton`.
- **Laser (`O_LASER`):** Request beam length. Maximum beam length is clamped to `min(map_width / 2, map_height / 2)` (default: 512 units for a 1024×1024 map). Fuel cost `length / g_laser_range_per_fuel_unit`. Cannot fire while docked.
- **Shield (`O_SHIELD`):** Consumes fuel 1:1 with requested shield gain (clamped to capacity). Applies before thrust.
- **Jettison:** Use the `SetJettison(MaterialKind, amount)` helper function, which takes a cargo type (`URANIUM` or `VINYL`) and a positive amount in tons. Internally, this converts to an `O_JETTISON` order with positive magnitude for uranium and negative magnitude for vinyl, but this is an implementation detail - **all jettison orders should be issued through `SetJettison()`**, not by calling `SetOrder(O_JETTISON, ...)` directly. Orders issued while docked are ignored by the engine.
- **Order clearing:** After execution each turn, `SetOrder(..., 0)` resets orders. Laser/shield/thrust/turn orders do not persist.

## 3. Velocity Governor
- Velocity is clamped to `g_game_max_speed = 30` units/second. After each thrust impulse, the engine calculates the desired velocity and clamps it to the speed circle if necessary.
- **Governor fuel penalty:** `CalcThrustCost` **is aware of velocity clamping** and applies an additional fuel penalty equal to the overshoot amount. The ship pays:
  1. **Base thrust cost** for the requested thrust magnitude
  2. **Governor penalty cost** for the overshoot amount (how much the velocity exceeds 30 u/s before clamping)
  3. **Total fuel cost** = base cost + governor penalty (effectively paying for more thrust than was actually applied)
- **Example:** Ship moving at 15 u/s issues thrust of 45 u/s in the same direction:
  - Desired velocity = 15 + 45 = 60 u/s
  - Clamped to 30 u/s (overshoot = 30 u/s)
  - Fuel cost = equivalent to **75 u/s of thrust** (45 requested + 30 penalty)
- Thrust is applied along the ship's current orientation; reverse thrust uses the opposite vector.
- Orientation is independent of velocity; the ship may drift sideways relative to its nose until thrust or collisions alter the trajectory.

## 4. Docking / Undocking Mechanics
- **Docking:** When a ship docks (collides with any station):
  - Sets `bDockFlag = true` and `Vel = 0`
  - **Immediately transfers all vinyl cargo** to the station's vinyl reserves (deducted from ship's cargo, added to station's score)
  - Ship is filtered from collision pairing except with their own station
- **Launch:** When issuing a thrust order while docked:
  - `ProcessThrustDriftNew` teleports the ship along orientation by `station_radius + ship_radius + ship_radius / 2` (48 units for default sizes)
  - Launch occurs before the first thrust impulse of the turn
  - **Thrust orders cost 0 fuel** for the entire launch turn (shield and laser orders still consume fuel normally)
- `pending_docks` set in `CollisionEvaluationNew` prevents newly docked ships from colliding again later in the same slice.

## 5. World Geometry
- Map extents: `[-fWXMax, fWXMax)` × `[-fWYMax, fWYMax)` (default ±512). `CCoord::Wrap()` and `PredictPosition()` implement toroidal projection.
- Angles: 0 radians = +X, π/2 = +Y. All physics use the standard mathematical orientation.
- Observer UI: renders +Y downward for display purposes. Internal math remains unchanged.

> **Tie-breaking utilities (NEW):** `CCoord::NormalizeCentered(reference)` and `CCoord::NormalizeEdges(reference)` expose explicit control over toroidal half-world ties. Both functions accept the coordinate that generated the displacement (typically the ship position). Use the centred variant when you want equidistant routes to pass through the middle of the map; use the edge variant to bias toward wraparound routes. Relying on the legacy normalization creates a strategic asymmetry: some stations launch toward the enemy via the centre, while mirrored stations default to the rim. Explicitly selecting a tie-breaker keeps mirrored playbooks tactically symmetric.

## 6. Fuel Accounting
- `SetOrder` returns the estimated fuel cost actually scheduled (after clamping to available fuel). Callers should rely on the returned value for planning.
- During execution, fuel is re-validated. If remaining fuel is insufficient for a slice, the engine scales the impulse proportionally.
- Shield charges happen before thrust; shield fuel draw can therefore reduce thrust capability within the same turn.
- Thrust orders on launch turns bypass fuel validation entirely (special-case in `ProcessThrustDriftNew`). Shield and laser orders still consume fuel normally.

## 7. Implementation Notes
- Orders live in `CShip::adOrders`. Values persist until consumed during `Drift`.
- Thrust/turn decisions rely on `g_pParser->UseNewFeature("velocity-limits")` to select new vs legacy logic; defaults enable the modern code paths.
- Random launch logging and collision ties draw from the world RNG seeded once at startup (`0x4D4D3434` by default). No team-owned RNGs influence physics, keeping runs reproducible.
- When extending navigation, ensure new orders respect the sub-step schedule and interact correctly with the velocity governor.
- Perfectly elastic collision normals (ship ↔ ship, ship ↔ non-fit asteroids) now use the geometric line-of-centers. When both centres coincide the engine falls back to the shared random heading stored in the collision context.

### 7.1 Initial Ship Orientation Fix

**Location:** `team/src/Ship.C`, lines 102-121 (CShip constructor)

**Feature Flag:** `initial-orientation` (enabled by default, disabled in `--legacy-mode`)

**Problem:** Legacy engine initialized all ships with `orient = 0.0` (facing east), creating an asymmetry:
- Station at (-256, -256): Ships face east (0°), which is ~45° **away** from map center (southeast)
- Station at (256, 256): Ships face east (0°), which is ~45° **toward** map center (southwest)

This gave one team an unfair advantage in initial positioning for resource collection toward the center.

**Solution:** Ships now face toward the map center for balanced gameplay:
```cpp
// In CShip::CShip() constructor (Ship.C:111-121):
extern CParser* g_pParser;
if (g_pParser && !g_pParser->UseNewFeature("initial-orientation")) {
    // Legacy mode: all ships face east (asymmetric)
    orient = 0.0;
} else {
    // New mode: ships face toward map center (balanced)
    // Negative X stations: face east (0)
    // Positive X stations: face west (π)
    orient = (StPos.fX < 0.0) ? 0.0 : PI;
}
```

**Result:**
- Team at (-256, -256): `orient = 0.0` (east, toward center)
- Team at (256, 256): `orient = π` (west, toward center)

Both teams now have symmetric starting conditions. The orientation is set once during ship construction and affects only initial spawn state - teams can rotate freely after that.

**Testing:** Run with `--legacy-initial-orientation` to restore the old asymmetric behavior for comparison.

For contest-level descriptions, see `CONTEST_NAVIGATION_FOR_CONTESTANTS.md`. For collision specifics, refer to the physics guides.
