# This is a scratchpad of everything I'm considering for this
# project. Please ignore.

===

Should this damage per unit user our function?

  107 +LaserResources ComputeLaserResources(const CShip* ship, double fuel_reserve) {
    108 +  LaserResources resources;
    109 +  resources.damage_per_unit =
    110 +      g_laser_mass_scale_per_remaining_unit / g_laser_damage_mass_divisor;



Some questions came up in code review of these changes:

Is this having an Error in units, laser_damage is 30*remaining beam length, but depleted vinyl (or ship shields) is laser_damge / 1000.0. Max damage is nearly always going to exceed station vinyl (which will be 200 or less).

    143 +  if (max_damage >= station_vinyl) {
    144 +    double beam_length =
    145 +        distance_to_target + (station_vinyl / laser.damage_per_unit);
    146 +    BeamEvaluation eval = EvaluateBeam(beam_length, distance_to_target);
    147 +    LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    148 +                       enemy_station,
    149 +                       eval,
    150 +                       "fire (destroy all vinyl)");


Some questions came up in code review of these changes:

Why do we call BeamEvaluation but then unconditi0onally set the
O_LASER order regardless of it's return value?

    146 +    BeamEvaluation eval = EvaluateBeam(beam_length, distance_to_target);
    147 +    LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    148 +                       enemy_station,
    149 +                       eval,
    150 +                       "fire (destroy all vinyl)");
    151 +    shooter->SetOrder(O_LASER, beam_length);
    152 +    return true;
    153 +  }


Some questions came up in code review of these changes:

This block has numerous problems:
1. It is confusing to have two variables called beam_length in such close scopes - and suggests some more refactoring is necesary.
2. There is lots of repeated code within a few lines of each other.
3. Refactor this - suggestion - pull beam length, BeamEvaluation, and good efficiency up to the top (and assign beam_length = laser.max_beam_length there. then put the rest of the code in if (max_damage..) { blahblha } else { blah blah } block, and overwrite beam_length to the shorter value in the first branch.


    143 +  if (max_damage >= station_vinyl) {
    144 +    double beam_length =
    145 +        distance_to_target + (station_vinyl / laser.damage_per_unit);
    146 +    BeamEvaluation eval = EvaluateBeam(beam_length, distance_to_target);
    147 +    LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    148 +                       enemy_station,
    149 +                       eval,
    150 +                       "fire (destroy all vinyl)");
    151 +    shooter->SetOrder(O_LASER, beam_length);
    152 +    return true;
    153 +  }
    154 +
    155 +  double beam_length = laser.max_beam_length;
    156 +  BeamEvaluation eval = EvaluateBeam(beam_length, distance_to_target);
    157 +  bool good_efficiency = (beam_length >= 3.0 * distance_to_target);
    158 +
    159 +  if (good_efficiency) {
    160 +    LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    161 +                       enemy_station,
    162 +                       eval,
    163 +                       "fire (partial damage)");
    164 +    shooter->SetOrder(O_LASER, beam_length);
    165 +    return true;
    166 +  }

Some questions came up in code review of these changes:

Refactor this to have many fewer nested branches:

    210 +  if (enemy_shield > 6.0) {
    211 +    double min_damage_to_cross = enemy_shield - 6.0 + kill_margin;
    212 +    bool can_cross_threshold = (max_damage >= min_damage_to_cross);
    213 +    if (can_cross_threshold) {
    214 +      bool good_efficiency = (beam_length >= 3.0 * distance_to_target);
    215 +      if (good_efficiency) {
    216 +        LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    217 +                           enemy_ship,
    218 +                           eval,
    219 +                           "fire (force dock)");
    220 +        shooter->SetOrder(O_LASER, beam_length);
    221 +        return true;
    222 +      }
    223 +
    224 +      LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    225 +                         enemy_ship,
    226 +                         eval,
    227 +                         "skip (poor efficiency)");
    228 +      return false;
    229 +    }
    230 +
    231 +    LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    232 +                       enemy_ship,
    233 +                       eval,
    234 +                       "skip (insufficient damage)");
    235 +    return false;
    236 +  }
    237 +
    238 +  LogPotshotDecision(shooter,
    239 +                     enemy_ship,
    240 +                     eval,
    241 +                     "skip (already vulnerable)");
    242 +  return false;
    243 +}


    // We consider where we and they will be in 1 turn, and then if
    // a beam the length of the distance between us on the heading
    // of our orientation next turn would hit them.
    //
    // TODO: This is imperfect from the physics side, and also 
    // has a major shortcoming of not checking if there is anything
    // between us (like a friendly ship!) but it's better than what
    // we were doing before.
    CCoord future_pos = ship->PredictPosition(g_game_turn_duration);
    CCoord future_thing_pos = thing->PredictPosition(g_game_turn_duration);
    CTraj desired_beam_path = future_pos.VectTo(future_thing_pos);

    double future_orient = ship->GetOrient() + ship->GetOrder(O_TURN);
    CTraj actual_beam_path = CTraj(desired_beam_path.rho, future_orient);
    // If our beam is more than 1/2 a ship radius away we imagine we
    // can't hit them (which isn't 100% right but is good enough for now.)
    if (desired_beam_path.ConvertToCoord().DistTo(actual_beam_path.ConvertToCoord()) > (g_ship_spawn_size / 2.0)) {
      continue;
    }

    double dist = future_pos.DistTo(future_thing_pos);


=== GrooReview ===

We are ready for another round of code reviews.

I have attached the latest simulator design docs in the docs.md
file, and updated project code in the .cpp files.

In addition the the checks requested below, perform a standard battery
of C/C++ static analysis checks such as those in the style of the ones
offered by Coverity, Black Duck, Clockwork, etc. (e.g. use after free,
inconsistent access of potentially null pointer after checks, and so
on).

We're going to conduct a code review for a portion of a codebase that
runs team Groonew in a simple 2d toroidal starship exploration and
combat game for a coding contest. Team Groonew has 4 ships which it
can issue order to once a second. These orders are designed to achieve
the game goals of returning vinyl to team Groonew's base, and removing
vinyl from the opposing teams base (by shooting it with lasers), and
potentially destroying or damaging opposing team ships.

The purpose of this review is to make sure the GrooNew's
implementation matches it's own internal comments for what it's
supposed to be doing, and is using game APIs correctly.

In particular we want to make sure it's pathfinding is toriodally
aware so that if, for example, one of Team Groonew's ships is trying
to intercept a target M, and:

Both are on the the y=0 worldline, with:
ship position = -300, 0
target position = 300, 0
Ship velocity = 30 to the right
Target velocity = 30 to the left

We correctly figure out that the fastest intrcept is to stay on our
current path (which is closing at 60 units per second), rather than
chase the target as it receeds from us by following the shorter (424
distance around the world boundary) distance (Note: the world speed
limit for all objects is 30 units per second).

The key point here is we are ONLY reviewing the Team Groonew's code -
some server code is provided for context, but we can only change the
code related to Team Groonew, it's pathfinding, GetVinyl, MagicBag,
Pathinfo, FuelTraj, etc.

Review this code for:

1. Errors in pathfinding, going the wrong way, over or undershooting,
etc.

2. Essential agreement between comments and code (e.g. if a comment
says "//shoot it!" we should be issuing an O_LASER command at some
point soon.

3. General errors like: Sign errors, inqueality wrong direction
errors, extensive computations whose values are never used, etc.

After we identify and fix crucial bugs I'll ask you for help
rearchitecting and simplifying the code for improved elegance - but
for now leave architectural or design issues for later and focus on
bugs/errrors that will lead to bad gameplay results.

Please report a list of detected issues, and for each issue include a
brief summary of the problem, the relevant line numbers / triggering
conditions, etc.. Each issue you flag will become an issue for a
developer to fix so include the correct level of detail that a
developer could address it.

==

We've implemented a large refactoring change in the current code
base. The changes are in the tracked but uncommitted files.

Review these changes and check for:

1. Functionally identical - the task here was to refactor to increase
  readability and ease of maintenance - no functionality should
  change. Is this the case for these changes?
 
2. No interaction with legacy code paths - the legacy code paths
  enabled by various --legacy parameters and guarded by various
  conditional checks of those settings should not have changed
  functionally in any way as a result of these changes. Is that the
  case for these changes?


==

We are ready for another round of code reviews.

I have attached the latest requirements / design docs ihn the docs.md
file, and updated project code in the .cpp files.

In addition the the checks requested below, perform a standard battery
of C/C++ static analysis checks such as those in the style of the ones
offered by Coverity, Black Duck, Clockwork, etc. (e.g. use after free,
inconsistent access of potentially null pointer after checks, and so
on).

We're going to conduct a code review for a portion of a codebase that
simulates a simple 2d toroidal starship exploration and combat game
which is the basis for a coding contest.

The purpose of this review is to make sure the implementation matches
the requirements, features, and interfeaces described in docs.md.

The code path we care about begins in:

Server's Simulation() method which itrerates and calls World's
PhysicsModel()

PhysicsModel() in turn calls the Drift() method on each thing in the
world, and then resolves collisions via CollisionEvaluation()

Things in the word are polymorphic types derived from CThing and are
one of:

CAsteroids CShips CStations

Or generic things (GENTHING) which are used to implement short lived
laser beams.

The key point here is for this code review we are ONLY reviewing the
Server Side implementation of the game physics, collision handling
system, etc. to ensure it meets the specifications in the docs. We
needent worry about client state or anything like that - we can treat
it as a black box.

The second key point is there is a default mode of operation, and a
LEGACY mode, enabled with various --legacy command line flags. This
review is ONLY of our default modes - consult the the default in
ArgumentParser.C - IGGNORE AND DO NOT REVIEW ANY CODE PATHS NOT ACTIVE
BY DEFAULT.

Review this code for:

1. Correctness in the physics model - watch for:

* Errors in implementation of supposedly perfectly elastic or
* inelastic collisions Dangerous floating point equality comparisons
* Dead/logically unreachable code which may indicate a logic error


2. Correctness of the collision system - watch for:

* Unintended race conditions Ways a duplicate collision could be
* registered between the same two items twice on the same turn Access
* to current/live Ship stats via GetXyZ() methods off the SHip object
* when it should be using cached or snapshotted states Systemic biases
* that predictably favor one team over the other

3. General errors like: Sign errors, inqueality wrong direction
errors, extensive computations whose values are never used, etc.

After we identify and fix crucial bugs I'll ask you for help
rearchitecting and simplifying the code for improved elegance - but
for now leave architectural or design issues for later and focus on
bugs/errrors that will lead to bad gameplay results.

Please report a list of detected issues, and for each issue include a
brief summary of the problem, the relevant line numbers / triggering
conditions, etc.. Each issue you flag will become an issue for a
developer to fix so include the correct level of detail that a
developer could address it.


====


We're going to conduct a code review for a portion of a codebase that
simulates a simple 2d toroidal starship exploration and combat game
which is the basis for a coding contest.

I have attached the latest requirements / design docs in the docs.md
file, and updated project code in the .cpp files.

The code path we care about begins in:

Server's Simulation() method which itrerates and calls World's
PhysicsModel()

PhysicsModel() in turn calls the Drift() method on each thing in the
world, and then resolves collisions via CollisionEvaluation()

Things in the word are polymorphic types derived from CThing and are
one of:

CAsteroids CShips CStations

Or generic things (GENTHING) which are used to implement short lived
laser beams.

The key point here is for this code review we are ONLY reviewing the
Server Side implementation of the game physics, collision handling
system, etc. to ensure it meets the specifications in the docs. We
needent worry about client state or anything like that - we can treat
it as a black box.

The second key point is there is a default mode of operation, and a
LEGACY mode, enabled with various --legacy command line flags. This
review is ONLY of our default modes - consult the the default in
ArgumentParser.C - IGGNORE AND DO NOT REVIEW ANY CODE PATHS NOT ACTIVE
BY DEFAULT.

Now review the system for architectural concerns:

* redundant / duplicative code that should be factored into its own
  module

* confused ownership semantics of state between interacting objects

* Areas where simplification could achieve the same result

* Overly complex methods which could be broken up at logical
  boundaries

* Readability and maintainability concerns

* Weird side effects / enforce the principle of least astonisment

====

Contest results:

Game 1-5 as team #2: 1: 80 | 120 | Win by ~93 2: 120 | 80 | Win by 160
3: 160 | 160 | Win by 120 4: 80 | 160 | Win by ~55 5: 160 | 97.777
(tie some vinyl destroyed)

Game 6-10 as team #1: 6: 120 | 120 7: 80 | 80 8: 120 | 120 9: 120 |
93.333 10: 120 | 40

7-3 | 5-4-1

===

Major old behaviors changed:

These can all be reverted at once with the --legacy flag.

Re-enabled with --legacy-velocity-limits:

  * 5x costing error for Ship Thurst orders than documented (although
    there is a suspicious 1/6th cost factor in allocating thrust, so
    maybe the end result was what was desired and it combined the
    costing error with a discount elsehwere).

  * Velocity Clamping Error - The velocity clamping approach did
    asymetrical things depending on the exect headings and thrust -
    and could even accelerate ships above the limit! Now velocity is
    clamped to 30 by: a. Compute the total velocity vector given by
    current_v + thrust b. Truncate the vector to the region inside our
    "velocity circle" whose radius is the game world's max speed.
    b. Charge an additional fuel penalty equal to the amount of thrust
    this truncation effectively gives to the ship "for free."

  * Turn Clamping - The original game engine allowed any value to the
    SetOrder for turns, and would charge fuel even though for example
    turns of: pi/4 and 200*pi + pi/4 both leave the ship with the same
    orientation. Now we normalize the input requested turn to
    [-pi,pi].

  * Station Departure Thrust - The original engine granted free thrust
    to departing ships only on the first 0.2 second subtick - once
    that time elapsed the ships were no longer docked, and hence
    thrust was no longer free. However since the only interface to
    players is the SetOrders method and that acts in 1 second
    increments, now all thrust for the entire duration of the O_THRUST
    order when departing a station is free of fuel costs.

  * Double spend bug with Shields and Thurst, or Shields and Turn -
    The game engine allows you to submit more orders than you have
    fuel for - only each individual order is clamped to current
    fuel. This is fine and in fact you may acquire fuel during turn
    sub-processing so it's OK to do this. However, there were errors
    in the legacy code where fuel availability checks were made, but
    then original requested thrust or turn amounts were used anyway.

  * Low fuel underturn/underthrust - The original implementation
    required ships to have enough fuel for their entire turn/thrust
    order at each subtick in the game, which caused these orders to be
    artificually clamped in very low fuel conditions.

Re-enabled with --legacy-asteroid-eat-damage:

  * Eatable Asteroid Collision Handling - The original simulation
    dealt damage to the ship when colliding with an asteroid
    regardless of whether the asteroid was "eaten" by the ship. Now
    the default behavior is eaten asteroids deal no damage to the
    ship.

Re-enabled with --legacy-collision-detection:

  * Collision Detection - Proper minimal time to intercept
    calculations. Previously the collision detection for A and B
    projected their relative velocity out from A a distance equal to
    their separation, and saw if that point was a collision. This
    approach is was not robust and would miss glancing collisions from
    oblique angles.

  * Collision Handling - The legacy system had many race conditions
    and other odd behaviors in it's collision handling system, and
    also processed collisions in a certain order that caused systemic
    biases (e.g. station collisions happened first in scenarios where
    multiple collisions were possible, the first team's collisions
    happened first in scenarios where multiple team objects were
    involved in collisions). You can read about some of the details in
    docs/LEGACY_COLLISION_ENGINE.md. We have a new collision handling
    system which:
    
     a. Fixes various bugs / unintended behaviors - including many
     instances of "double hits" where a collision would be reigsterd
     twice or more, effectively making them more damaging than
     documented.

     b. Resolves collisions in ascending order of overlap which
     attempts to monitor which collisions would have happened first,
     and elimintates many systemic biases. (e.g. if a ship and a
     station overlay by 5, and a ship and an small asteroid overlap by
     2, the ship docks first and then the asteroid collision ends up
     not happening because you can't collide with docked things. Note
     that in this scenario the distance between the ship and the
     station is still 30+12-5=37 which is much more than the distance
     between the asteroid and the ship - however we take the geater
     overlap to indicate the ship would have hit the station first.)

     c. In the cases where overlap is equal, we process the collisions
     in a random order to eliminate systemic bias.

     d. We do lots of clean up logic once a collision happens to
     prevent nonsensiscal results (e.g. once an asteroid has collided
     with a ship and been eaten, re remove that asteroid from any
     future collision analysis this turn).

Re-enabled with --legacy-docking:

  * Failed Launches - The existing code remembered the separation
    distance between a ship and a station at the time it docked, and
    then added 5 to this number on undocking (with an initial distance
    of 0). This caused - especially in the initial game turns - a
    behavior of ships launching, and being immediatly redocked, and
    then having to launch again as the docking distance is "walked
    out" in steps of 5 until it exceeds 42. The new behavior just
    always places launching ships a distance of: StationSize +
    ShipSize + ShipSize/2 away (the last ShipSize/2 is to give a
    safety margin.

Re-enabled with --legacy-laser-exploit:

  * Laser Power Determined Exclusively by Order Magnitude - This
    presented a mundane fuel tracking error where a laser order would
    always operate on the requested order amount, not on available
    fuel, and since shields and some portion of turn and thrust orders
    are processed before lasers this could generate slight errors in
    low fuel conditions. However, it also presented the opportunity
    for a substantial exploit where a clever attacker could make a
    derived class from Ship and use it to set arbitrarily large laser
    orders and one shot anything. This is demonstrated in the
    jameskirk/ team, and can only be seen when the exploit is enabled
    via the flag.

Re-enabled with --legacy-rangecheck-bug:

  * Weird Test Leads to Failed Laser Hits Depending on Floating Point
    Errors - We're not 100% sure why this test was originally
    inserted, but we suspect it was inteded as a range check. However
    what the comparison actually does is compute the beam length two
    different ways, and then check of beam_computed_way_1 >
    beam_computed_way_2. Ideally this would never be true - however
    due to floating point errors it can be. When it is true othewise
    valid laser targets are missed.

Re-enabled with --legacy-physics:

  * Non-conservation of momentum on jettison - When jettisoning
    asteroids the simulation "fires" them out the front of the ship at
    the ships current velocity - however it registered a momentum
    kickback of twice the jettisoned asteroid. We conserve momentum by
    default now.

  * Non-conservation of momentum on various collision types -
    Asteroid-Laser, Asteroid-Ship, Laser-Ship, and Ship-Ship
    collisions used to use various different physics for collisions
    now: All laser collisions are pefectly inelastic collisions, and
    Asteroid-Ship and Ship-Ship collisions are perfectly
    elastic. (Station interactionns are unchanged and for asteroids
    correctly model collisions with "infinite" masses.

?? Make rotational fuel costs go here too.

Not re-enableable:

  * Create Vinyl With Jettison Bug - you could jettison any amount of
    Vinyl as the bounds check to not jettison more than you had an
    incorrect inequality.

==================================

========================== ENGINE TODO ================================


???????????? LASER TARGETING BUG ?????????????????????????

Q. Is there a bug in LaserTarget?

* We check if we are IsFacing, but we compare distance with DistTo
  which uses toroidal aware distance, and may not be the distance in
  the direction we're facing.

* Also, the interface here seems confusing - if mindist > dlaspwr then
  we're not actually going to hit anything - we are just aiming at
  something too far away - so when that happens do we want to know
  that, or do we want to get that we're not aiming at anything.

* AS PHRASED TO GTP-T HIGH: Is there a subtle bug in
  CShip::LaserTarget whereby both IsFacing and DistTo use toroid aware
  geometry, and so will report that a Ship is facing a target only if
  it is facing it along the shortest path to the target?  E.g. if a
  ship is at (-400, 0) and is oriented with theta = 0 (facing
  rightward), and an asteroid is at (400, 0), won’t LaserTarget return
  false for that ship?

Now - it just so happens in our implementation that the maximum laser
distance is 512 units, so in practice this might not matter much -
however the logic for LaserTarget considers the case where a laser
can’t reach the target and reports that yes, it is facing that target
when it believes IsFacing is true - so at the least this seems
inconsistent.  ===END GTP-5 QUERY===

=== GTP ANSWER === Short answer: Yes, that subtlety is real.

What happens

- Toroid-shortest facing: CThing::IsFacing uses the shortest-wrap
vector (CCoord::AngleTo/VectTo). So a ship at (-400, 0) facing θ=0
with a target at (400, 0) is deemed “not facing” (shortest vector is
left, x = −224), and LaserTarget will ignore it. If the ship faces
θ=π, IsFacing returns true and the target can be selected.  - Range
mismatch: CShip::LaserTarget picks the nearest facing target even if
it’s out of range; it only clamps dLaserDist for UI. It does not null
the target when mindist > laser power.  - Flawed range check later:
World::LaserModel then “validates” range using DistTo(ship, LasPos),
but LasPos was constructed as ship + (L, orient). DistTo there is the
shortest toroidal distance and will be ≤ L by construction, so the
range check almost never rejects.  If the true shortest distance to
the target D > L, the code still proceeds and computes laser “mass” as
30*(L − D), which can be negative.

Impact

- Your example (800 along the long way) is unreachable anyway because
max laser length is clamped to 512, so ignoring it is consistent with
range. But the inconsistency remains: LaserTarget says “facing” based
on shortest-path alignment, not on whether the forward ray can reach
the target; and out‑of‑range targets can slip through to LaserModel,
producing negative laser mass.  - Side effect: Stations subtract cargo
by mass/1000. A negative mass would increase station cargo. That’s a
real bug path when mindist > L but IsFacing is true.

Minimal fixes (pick one)

- Enforce range in target selection: In CShip::LaserTarget, skip
targets with DistTo > current laser power (retain dLaserDist for UI).
- Correct the range check: In CWorld::LaserModel, replace the
DistTo(ship, LasPos) check with an along-ray test. Compute dir =
unit(GetOrient()); for candidate target center c (consider 9 toroidal
images c + (iW, jH)), project r = (c − ship) onto dir: t = dot(r,
dir), d_perp = |cross(r, dir)|. Require 0 ≤ t ≤ L and d_perp ≤
target.size; pick the smallest t. If none hit, treat as out of range.

If you’d like, I can patch LaserTarget to filter by range (simple, low
risk), or implement the proper ray-cast (robust and consistent with
wrap-around).

Q8. Question 8: LaserTarget and Toroidal Geometry Your interpretation
is correct. CShip::LaserTarget relies on IsFacing, which uses CCoord
subtraction to find the shortest path vector across the torus.  In
your example (Ship at -400 facing East, Target at 400), the shortest
path is West. IsFacing returns FALSE. The ship cannot target the "long
way around."  This is consistent in practice because the laser range
is capped at 512 units (half the world size).  Subtle Bug (The
Antipode): There is an edge case bug when the target is exactly
halfway across the world (distance 512). At this point, there are
multiple equally valid shortest paths (e.g., East and West). CCoord
normalization arbitrarily chooses one. If the ship is facing the
target along one shortest path, but CCoord normalization chooses the
opposite path, IsFacing will return FALSE, preventing the laser from
firing despite correct alignment.

????????????????? LASER BUG ???????????????????

* Game option to prevent docking at enemy bases (set at start time of
  either the server or observer) (counts as collision with asteroid
  for damage?)

* Game option to create uranium and vinyl equal to fuel and vinyl
  carried when a ship is blown up.

* Game option to prevent asteroid dust due to collision - if a
  collision happens and you can't pick up and it would result in too
  small due to break, no break.

* Configure number and size of initial asteroids.

??????????????? Find the questions I asked here ?????????????????

Q. Based on DeepThik's answer to Q3, it claims my two scenarios result
in different costs. get to ground truth on that with a hello world
type example.

??????????????????????????????????????/

===2===

Add a rule that you can't set jettison orders while docked / you get
back a zero in planning - since you can't jettison while docked why
set the order.  * NOTE: before changing this consider the implications
on subtuns - maybe you can issue a jettison order and then blast off
or land or something.

====

Q. Question 6: What does the default mode of the switch statement on
(ord) in SetOrder do? It looks like maybe it allows you to pass in
O_ALL_ORDERS and get the combined fuel for the: shield, laser, and
thrust operations on the assumption that they all don’t exhaust each
others fuel (which they might in reality).  What do you think the
purpose of this is? Is it used anywhere?

Q. The max laser power in Ship.C's SetOrder seems somewhat arbitrary,
 and forces laser combat to be close up predominantly (can't shoot at
 targets at extreme range without rotating to take the closer shot
 through boundaries, can't pump lots of damage into far ranging
 targets).

Q. Team based pBrain and GetBrain do nothing??!?

Q. Can you mess with other team stuff in your team? Kill their ships,
set their messages? Or is the overall loop: server maintans world,
sends world copies to teams, teams issue orders, server updates world
based on orders, repeat.

Q. (Can you issue orders on other teams ships?  that the server will
do)?

Q. What is CWorld::SetTeam for? It seems like it's stripping out ships
and stations of the other team? And then adding in the ones for the
new team? Why bother with all this?

####################### END ENGINE TODO #############################

========================== Groonew TODO =============================

NOTE: We had a weird bug of "lazy" ships that weren't flying home. I
moved around some debugging logic but don't think I changed anything
and I went away. Maybe it was FP math on remaining resources leading
to incorrect guesses about remaining vinyl and uranium. Keep an eye
out for if it comes back. (I did change comparisons on is_vinyl /
is_uranium to want more than fp epsillon.

Need better shooting logic - we shoot ourselves a lot or get bumped off:
* Revisit the assumption that we shoot early in the turn
* Check where we'll be in a turn
* Check if any dam thing is colliding with us first and abort

How does our n_turns_vector / n_turns thing actually work?, e.g. If
we're moving to the right at 1 unit/sec and we want to be at -5 in
5 seconds, then we need to change our velocity to -1 this turn, or
-6/5 next turn, a change of -2 or -11/5, not a change of -5 (or -6) /
5?

Does it ever make sense to shoot a asteroid to break it up (other than
perhaps action econmy of getting to smaller chunks a tick earlier?)
how much fuel does it take to break it up, versus how much shield do
you lose and how much fuel to restore shield?

* Improve Groonew collision detection in determine_orders - we predict
  where thing X will be in N turns, but we could also check if thing X
  is going to collide with something before N turns, and if so not
  bother trying to intercept it at a place it won't likely to be in
  those turns.

3. Double check our base launch logic for turn 1 - make sure we get
the benefit of extra kicks and check if our logic properly handles
is_docked and fuel costs while docked.
  * See if we're pervasively crashing into one another on first launch
    - toy with approaches like turn 1: orient twards middle in fan,
    turn 2 max launch, turn 3+ normal control.

Handle undocking logic: When we undock we are teleported 48 units
along our launch direction before drift.

Add fun announcer quotes - commence primary ignition, let's blow this
thing and go home, Asteroids to not concern the empire, etc.

We are also pretty bad at shooting ships - look at how Chromefunk does
htis - it's actually much btter - we might be trying to get too close,
or maybe we need to get onto an intercept pursuit angle and not come
at them obliquely or something.

In endgame - don't max up shields before colliding with big uranium -
just take the hit to preserve more uranium in the world.

If we're done with everything else, and there's still uranium, harvest
it.

After reducing enemy base to 0 and killing all enemy ships do a little
acrobatic manouvers.

FOR EVOAI - Give it groogroo as a base, and then have the evoai
compete against groonew? Once Groonew is conistently beating groogroo!

TOROIDTOROIDTOROID
  Q. General nagivation / logic quersions - what happens near edges -
    if we're pursuing something and it is going to be at 513, which is
    -511, do we follow it straight or turn around - does vector
    operations suddenly say it is PI behind us instead of 0 ahead if
    we were heading to it dead on?

0. I definitely need to consider toroidal approaches in perfect
nagivation - getting shortest distance doesn't give shortest time to
intercept - ESPECIALLY with a max speed.
Consider the 1d case where ships are conceptually on a circle of
circumference L:

Dshort <= L/2
Dlong >= L/2
Best time to intecept short = Dshort / (maxspeed - vtarget)
Best time to intercept long = Dlong / (maxspeed - vtarget)

Ignoring some unit confusion above with speed and velocity, the basic
idea is its very easy for the best time to intercept being along the
long path, if the target is moving away from you at close to maxspeed
- even if you pay a 1 turn penalty for turning around and drifting.

TODO: Formally solve this / come up with a formula / logic to pick
direction.
TOROIDTOROIDTOROID

Minor fix: * The 5 1/5th turns thing is going to cause some trouble
too but that should be a fine detail and our gross 1 turn planning
should hold up well-ish.

**************** GROONEW PERFECT NAV ************************************

* See extensive todos and "Steps" in the documentation of determine
  order in Groonew.C and GetVinyl.C for team Groonew.

Consider if a better build out for team groonew involves a hunter ship
with 60 fuel who tries to shoot enemy ships in the early game and base
late game.

* Perfect navigation in Groogroo/MattMatt:
  * Phase 2 - fixes related to 0.2 micro tics between game turns.

1. Navigation enhancements: Shortest distance doesn't necessarily mean
fastest time to intercept, and/or cheapest cost. Consider the case
where presently it is only marginally better to go left than right in
terms of distance, however we currently have a large velocity to the
right - we might get there in the same number of turns going right, at
a much reduced cost.

* Think deep thoughts about magic bag, whereby we want to know for N
  turns among all possible paths which ones get to the item with the
  least cost (also possible in the future consider which ones woudl
  generate the least collisions).

* Alternatively, add all the paths to the magic bag and magic bag can
  have multiple things for any target with (path1, nturns, cost),
  (path2, nturns, cost) ,etc. etc.

  * could weight colisions with our station highly as we get free acceleration?
  * Could consider alternate paths in all cases of: go to station and then launch?

* Deep thoughts for future perfect navigation:
  1. Our current approach assumes if you can't reach destination D with
  one rotation and one thurst in T turns you can't reach it at all in
  T turns.
      * This turns out to be false, there are plenty of times when
      thrust-turn-thrust and maybe other approache are better (even
      leaving aside the stuff that happens with thrust governing
      giving us the ability "turn" in the sense we rotate our velocity
      vector in a somewhat controlled manner without issuing the TURN
      order.
  1. DEEP THINK ON OPTIMAL PATHING IN 2D:
     https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_AvkE_JgxQ920-TOI9HCcrU0C_781qOoa-mtjaHXHnM/edit?tab=t.0

* Improve Groonew collision handling. As it is it iterates over the
  world and locks orders and maybe breaks if it detects certain
  scenarios - but really we want to consider all collisions ordered
  from soonest to latest or something like that. The current logic
  nondeterministically identifies one of the things we're colliding
  with soon and plans based on that - we can do better.

**************** END GROONEW PERFECT NAV ************************************

1. For Codex branch, check if Team Ares is using toroidal logic,
suggest it to use the relevant thing/ship primatives which do that
correctly.

------------------- SYSTEM NOTES -----------------------------------------

What is the inheritance hierarchy for our project:

Asteroid, Laser, Ship, Station IS A Thing

CTeam HAS A:
  * CWorld (pmyWorld)
  * CBrain (pBrain)
  * Array of CShips (apShips)
  * CStation (pStation)

Player teams IS A CTeam

Thing is base class for Asteroid, Ship, Station, and Laser

CShips have:
  * Ship physics:
    * A ships mass is 40 + its fuel + its vinyl
  * Costs and limits (other than default fuel limits)
    * Shield increase 1:1 with fuel spent
    * Lasers cost the value to be fired / 50
    * Thrusting costs the magnitude of the new velocity after the acceleration is applied * current ship mass (see above) / 6*maxspeed*empty_ship_mass = 6*30*40 = 7200. (New velocity vector limited by maxspeed)
      * Thrusting out of a docked position is free, however may be gated based off max fuel size
    * Turning costs the O_TURN provided |value| * ship mass / 12*PI*empty ship mass = 480*Pi - turning SETS THE SHIPS ROTATION TO THE O_TURN AMOUNT IN RADIANS PER SECOND.
    * Jettison costs nothing for vinyl, and the amount jettisoned for fuel.
  * Members: myNum, bDockFlag, dDockDist, dLaserDist, pBrain, arrays of: adOrders, adStatCur, atStatMax
  * Methods (among others like establish capacities):
    * Drift - handles order proceeeing on the ships turn:
      * 1st Jettisons stuff, if any
      * 2nd updates sields, if any
      * Then turns, if any
      * Then thrusts, if any
      * Then updates position
    * AsteroidFits
    * LaserTarget (Purportedly what laserbeam will hit if fired) - does so only if the ship is facing along the shortest straight line path - which is not a catastrophe given our 512 length max laser, but is inconsisntent in that it will report targets that can't be reached (due to short requested laser length or fuel constraints) on the shortest path as we face, but not any (definitionally unreachable due to max beam length) tarets on the longer paths that we face.
      * This logic may in fact be the reason for the 512 max beam length (also a 1024 or larger beam will hit yourself if it hits nothing else)
    * GetLaserBeamDistance (purportedly the distance the beam will traverse)
    * AngleToIntercept - Seems to correctly compute the angle we need to turn to _FACE_ another target next turn taking both our velocites into account, and assuming they stay the same - but this will not do correct vector math I think.
    * AstToStat
    * StatToAst
    * Reset/Get/Set Orders, and special SetJettison/GetJettison
    * HandleCoollision
    * HandleJettison
  
CThings have:
  * Members kind, mass, size, orient, velocity, team, alive, image, name, worldindex, world.
  * Methods:
    * Drift
    * Collide
    * Overlaps
    * GetMomentum (return velocity*mass)
    * DetectCollisionCourse <- fundamentally broken, I changed it (it was using flyby logic which wasn't figuring the closest point of approach - it was more or less estimating if these things would collide if 
    * PredictPosition <- only predicts position, not how we'll be facing
    * RelativeVelocity <- other.velocity - our.velocity
    * RelativeMomentum <- RelativeVelocity * other.mass
    * IsFacing <- True if overlap (buggy due to FP stuff), otherwise establishes a coordinate system with our ship at the origin, and then draws a line on our facing out to DistTo(Other) distance and sees if that point is within the radius of the other object.
    * HandleCollision (virtual)

Physics Engine:

The server's game loop:
while (time < 300.0) { Simulation(); BroadcastWorld(); ReceiveTeamOrders(); }

The team client's game loop:
while (connected) { ReceivedWorld(); DoTurn(); }
  * the Client's DoTurn() gets data
    * calls Team::Reset()
      * The Team::Reset() method calls ResetOrder() on each ship.
    * calls Team::Turn()
      * This method does nothing by default, teams provide their own
        implementation.
    * then sends info back to the server.

SO WE DO ALL OF THIS:
The server's Simulation() does:
  1. The world's PhysicsModel() with a small tstep (0.2) 5 times.
  2. After the 5th call, when 1 second has elapsed, it calls the world's LaserModel() which handles laser collision, adding new and killing dead things.

At each step the PhysicsModel does:
  1. For each thing their Drift(dt) method which is 0.2 in our example
  2. CollisionEvaluation()
  3. AddNewThings()
  4. KillDeadThings()

In the Drift step above:
  1. CShip::Drift:
     * clamps to maxspeed
     * Does orders in this sequence: Jettison, Shields, Turn, Thrust (which in turn will change Vel if a thrust occurs, and change omega of a turn occurs)
     * Changes position and orientation by Vel*dt and omega*dt
     * Sets omega and dLaserDist to zero
  2. Asteroids just do the default CThing behavior of move/rotate dt.
== THEN WE GET NEW ORDERS AND REPEAT ===

Coordinates:

CTraj has a rho (magnitude) and theta (direction):
  * Can ConvertToCort and be created FromCord:
    * Convert to cord makes x = rho*cos(theta) and y follows sin - so "convert to cord" gives you the coordinate this vector points to from the origin.
    * FromCoord also assumes the coordinates are relative to the origin and computes the vector.
  * Normalize() - Keeps -PI < theta < PI and rho  > 0
Notes:
  * Defines const doubles for PI and PI2.

CCord has an x and a y position, and methods:
  * cc.DistTo( occ ) Shortest distance taking toroidal geometry into account
  * cc.AngleTo( occ ) Proper heading for shortest distance taking toroidal geometry into account
  * cc.VectTo( occ ) returns a CTraj object with a vector to the other point
  * cc.Normalize() for putting coordinates into the game field
Notes:
  * Coord.h defines the playing field boundary as -512 to 512 with const doubles fW[X|Y][Max|Min]

=== SERVER / CLIENT LOGIC ===

  Client-Server Architecture

  1. Team Binary Compilation: Each team (like ChromeFunk) is compiled into the mm4team binary. The key is that
   CTeam::CreateTeam() in ChromeFunk.C:10 returns a ChromeFunk instance, linking the team's AI logic into the
  binary.
  2. World State Management:
    - Server maintains authoritative world state (all ships, asteroids, stations)
    - Client receives complete world snapshots via ReceiveWorld() which calls pmyWorld->SerialUnpack()
  (Client.C:166)
    - The initial world creation in Client.C constructor is just placeholder - immediately replaced when
  MeetWorld() connects to server
  3. Game Loop Flow:
  Client (mm4team.C:28-29):
  1. ReceiveWorld() - Get full world state from server
  2. DoTurn() - Execute team AI and send orders back
  4. Team Logic Execution (Client.C:204-217):
    - DoTurn() calls pTm->Turn() which executes ChromeFunk's strategic AI
    - ChromeFunk::Turn() iterates through ships calling pSh->GetBrain()->Decide()
    - Each brain's Decide() sets ship orders (thrust, turn, fire, etc.)
    - Orders are packed via SerialPack() and sent to server
  5. State Synchronization:
    - From Server: Full world state including all ship positions/velocities/cargo/shields
    - To Server: Only ship orders (thrust amount, turn amount, fire commands)
    - Server simulates physics and combat, then broadcasts updated world state

  The team AI (ChromeFunk) never directly modifies world state - it only reads state and generates orders. The
   server is authoritative for all physics and game state changes.

  One Time Team Initialization Protocol

  When a team client connects (Client.C:129-135), it:

  1. Calls Init() - Team sets names and capacities (ChromeFunk.C:36-56):
    - Team name: "Chrome Funkadelic"
    - Station name: "HeartLand"
    - Ship names: "SS TurnTable", "Bell Bottoms", etc.
    - Ship capacities: 45.0 fuel, 15.0 cargo
  2. Packs initialization data via SerPackInitData() (Team.C:243-272) which sends:
    - Team number
    - Team name
    - Station name
    - For each ship:
        - Cargo capacity
      - Fuel capacity
      - Ship name
  3. Server receives and unpacks this data using SerUnpackInitData() (Team.C:274-307), which:
    - Sets all the names on server-side objects
    - Configures ship capacities
    - Initializes fuel to max capacity and shields to 15.0

  This is a one-time handshake during connection. After this, the server knows all team/ship/station names and
   ship capacities, allowing it to:
  - Enforce cargo limits during pickup operations
  - Track fuel consumption based on configured capacity
  - Display correct names in observer views
  - Manage team-specific station operations

  The team binary configures these values in Init(), but they're immediately transmitted to and stored by the
  server, which becomes the authoritative source for all game mechanics involving these properties.

==== ChromeFunk Brain Approach ====

The CBrain hierarchy in ChromeFunk demonstrates a context-switching AI pattern using
  temporary brain replacements. Here's the design:

  Brain Hierarchy

  CBrain (base class)
  ├── Voyager    - Station departure specialist (temporary)
  ├── Stalker    - Navigation/interception
  ├── Shooter    - Combat (inherits from Stalker)
  └── Gatherer   - Resource collection (inherits from Shooter)

  The Brain-Swapping Pattern

  The key insight is in Voyager (lines 43-54, 56-81):

  1. Temporary replacement: Voyager stores the previous brain (pLastBrain) and installs itself
  2. Self-deletion: Once undocked, Voyager deletes itself, automatically restoring the previous
   brain via its destructor
  3. Example flow: Gatherer → Voyager → Gatherer

  This happens in Gatherer::Decide() at line 343:
  if (pShip->IsDocked()) {
      new Voyager(this);  // Creates Voyager, which replaces Gatherer temporarily
      return;             // Voyager handles departure, then restores Gatherer
  }

  Requirements That Led to This Design

  This implementation suggests these requirements:

  1. Specialized behaviors: Different tasks need completely different decision logic (docking
  vs combat vs gathering)
  2. State preservation: Ships need to return to their previous behavior after temporary tasks
  3. Clean transitions: No complex state machines or if/else chains cluttering the main logic
  4. Reusable components: Shooter extends Stalker, Gatherer extends Shooter - building
  complexity through inheritance
  5. Self-managing contexts: Behaviors know when they're done and clean up after themselves

  The pattern allows ships to have a "stack" of behaviors - push a temporary brain for special
  situations (like undocking), then pop back to the previous behavior automatically. It's
  elegant for handling context switches without losing the ship's primary mission.

===============

Dubins' Result: The shortest path between any two positions+orientations is one of only 6 types:

LSL, RSR, LSR, RSL, RLR, LRL

Advanced: Reeds-Shepp Vehicle
Like Dubins but can reverse:

Adds backward segments
48 types of optimal paths instead of 6
Used for parking, tight maneuvering

==============

------------------------------- END NOTES ----------------------------------------------------

QAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQAQA

Q. Can you cheat by setting things like ship velocity, asteroid size,
base vinyl, etc.?
A. You can set these things, but your team is running in a client
which gets a private version of the world each tick from the
server. The server recieves your orders and processes physics based on
them, and resends the updated world, so you can't cheat this way.

Q. Can you cheat by manipulating the raw orders set rather than using
SetOrder?
A. Yes, with limited success: you can create a derived class of CShip
that has no private data members (and hence the same memory layout as
CShip) with members that cast a CShip via C style casting or
reinterpret cast to be your derived class and return pointers to the
undostats and order arrays for direct manipulation, however:
  * adStat values are ignored by the server from the client's data
  * adOrders are processed - so you can do things like set multiple
    orders or set magnitudes you wouldn't have been allowed to, but
    the server then replays most of orders through the Ship.C's
    SetOrders which enforces the rules. It is possible you could
    trigger a corner case here, but the design of SetOrders is
    intended to be robust against this.
  * However, the legacy engine implementation of LaserModel does allow
    an exploit here - it powers the laser with whatever has been set
    in the order, and fires it with that amount, and only later does
    it deduct fuel.

Q. Can you cheat by issuing multiple commands whose combined fuel cost
exceeds available fuel but still get their benefits?

A. Generally no - but there is again a special case with the Laser
implementation. The legacy engine will effectively do this:
1. Raise shields by full requested amount, deducting the fuel required.
2. Do the first subtick (0.2) seconds of Thurst or Turn if one is specified, deducting the fuel required.
3. Shoot lasers based on the input command value, then figure fuel.
4. Do the remainin subticks of Thurst/Turn.
In step 3 you can exceed your fuel alotment - especially if you raised
shields. Lasers are effectively "free" on any turn where you'd run out
of fuel before the 2nd physics tick anyway.

================== END Q&A ===========================================


ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ DAMAGE NOTES ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ

Ship, Asteroid, and Station Damage Overview:

* Ships take damage to shields from collisions with Asteroids, other
  Ships, and lasers. If the damage ever exceeds shields remaining the
  ship is destroyed. Ships dock when they "collide" with stations
  taking no damage. Ships take no damage from other collisions or
  lasers while docked.

* Asteroids take damage from collisions with Ships and
  Lasers. Collisions automatically shatter asteroids into 3 equal size
  pieces, or destroy them if doing so would make the fragments smaller
  than 3.0 Tons. Asteroids bounce off of stations and don't collide
  with one another (e.g. can overlap one another on the map).

* Stations take damage from lasers only. Laser damage depletes vinyl
  stores on the station down to a minim of zero.

Order Sequencing:
* Once each team has submitted orders to the server the following occurs:
  1. Shield raising orders are processed first.
  2. Then Thurst, Turn, Drifting and resulting collisions in one
  sub-step of 1/5th of a full turn duration.
  3. Then laser shots are processed in full, including damage being dealt.
  4. Then Thrust, Turn, Drifting and resulting collisions in four
  steps of 1/5th of a full turn duration.

Ship Non-Laser Collision Damage Calculations:

* When a ship collides with an asteroid or another ship, it takes
  shield damage equal to: (the mass of the object collided with)*(the
  magnitude of the relative velocity of the colliding objects) / 1000.

Ship Collision Notes:

* Damage depends only on the mass of the object collided with - not
  the mass of the ship which collides
* The maxiumum theoretical combined velocity of two colliding objects
  is 60
* Ships weigh 40 tons + their current fuel + their current vinyl cargo
  which means they lie in the range of 40-100 tons.
* Asteroids weigh between 3 and 40 tons. (Theoretically asteroids of
  up to 60 tons could exist if a ship with 60 tons of cargo collected
  60 tons worth of asteroids and jettisoned them, but we ignore these
  corner cases).

Therefore the maximum damage from a single collision to shields is:
  (60*100)/1000 = 6 for a ship to ship collision
  (60*40)/1000 = 2.4 for a ship to asteroid collision
  
Note: Due to engine behaviors that temporarily allow for excess speed
during the simulation, the theoretical Ship-Ship damage is closer to
8.4 but this would only happen in exceptional cases, and this behavior
may be changed.


Ship Laser Damage Calculations:

When a ship fires a laser it specifies a beam length of up to 512 (max
beam length = min(world_width/2, world_height/2)).

The fuel cost to fire a laser is beam length / 50.

When a beam strikes a target it is treated as a collision with an
object of mass: 30*(beam length - distance from firing ship to target)

Ship Laser Notes:

* Ships have a radius of 12, so when two ships shoot at one another
  they are always at least 24 units apart.

* For a "point blank" laser shot of beam length L:
  * The shooter spends L/50 fuel on the laser
  * The target loses (30*(L-24))/1000 shields. Note further that 1
  unit of shield costs 1 unit of fuel.

So for a point blank laser shot the shooter expends Fs fuel to
deplete: 30*(Fs*50-24)/1000 = St of the target's shields.
* So in terms of Fs, the target's shield loss is (24+1000*St/30)/50 =
  24/50 + 2*St/3.
* In other words, for each unit of fuel the shooter spends at point
  blank the target would have to spend around 1.5 units of fuel to
  prevent that much damage with their shields

The "break even" distance Db at which a shooter's fuel cost to damage
shields is equal to the targets cost to raise their shields is:
  * Fs = L/50 = St = (30*(L-Db))/1000 is when Db = L/3, or put another way:
  * When the target is closer than 1/3rd of the beam length shooting
    is more cost effective than shields, and beyond that less cost
    effective.

Shooting is 2x more costly than shields at Db = 2L/3, and then
degrades rapidly (3x more costly at 7L/9, 10x more costly at 14L/15).

The maximum damage from a single laser blast at point blank range of a
maximum power laser is: 30*(512-24)/1000 = 14.64.

Asteroid Laser Damage Calculations:

These are similar to ship to ship calculations where:
* Any single shot that deals >= 1 unit of Shield damage shatters an asteroid
* Any single shot that deals < 1 unit of Shield damage has no effect
  (cumulative small damage have no effect - it does not accumulate
  like a ship).

Station Laser Damage Calculations:

These are similar to ship to ship calculations where:
* A shot that would deal X units of Shield damage depletes the vinyl
  stores of the Station by X, to a minimum of 0.

ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ

========================== GAME PHYSICS AND CONSTANTS QUICK REFERENCE ====================

Asteroid radius: 3+1.6*sqrt(mass)
Ship radius: 12
Station radius:

Maxspeed = 30
Game world is 2-D toroid with x, y are in [-512,512)
Items have an orientation, which is in [-PI, PI) with 0 to the right / eastward.

Asteroid mass:
 * >= minmass = 3.0
 * Typically either 40 (our games creation size), or 40/3 (after first break) or 40/9 (after second break). Other sizes are possible due to ships jettisoning different amounts

Ship mass:
 * Empty mass = 40
 * Total mass = 40 + fuel tons on board + vinyl tons on board

Items take damage by colliding with masses:
Ships colliding with laser: Remaining laser mass / 1000 damage
Ships colliding with ship or asteroid: Magnitude of relative velocity between ship and the other thing * mass of the other thing / 1000

Lasers are modeled as colliding masses for damage purposes.
  * Max beam length: 512
  * Beam fuel cost: 1 ton of fuel per 50 units of length
  * Beam collision mass: 30 * (L - D) where L is the total beam length, and D is the distance along the beam before collision
    * (internally this is handled by replacing beam strikes with temporary beam objects that originate 1 unit away from the center of the target along the mean line)

################# END GAME PHYSICS AND CONSTANTS QUICK REFERENCE ######################

